Nvidia GeForce GTX 680 graphics card, based on the Kepler architecture, was released about a year ago, which is quite a long time by the standards of the GPU industry, even though the latter has slowed down recently. Many of us expected AMD and Nvidia to roll out new processors and technologies this spring but it never happened. Moreover, traditional autumnal announcements are uncertain too, according to latest news. For example, AMD has decided just to rename its graphics cards once again.

Still, there is at least one interesting product which is absolutely new. It is the Nvidia GeForce GTX Titan graphics card.



Shipped as a limited edition (10,000 pieces) at a recommended $999 apiece, it is no mass product. The GK110 processor installed on the Titan comes from professional Tesla K20X cards designed for supercomputers and high-performance servers. They have different standards there, hence the extremely high price for a single-GPU solution from a desktop user’s standpoint.

Let’s see what Nvidia offers for that substantial sum of money.

The new GeForce GTX Titan resembles the GeForce GTX 690 visually. It has the same color of the metallic casing on its face side, the same inserts and the same polycarbonate window:





There’s a logo with LED highlighting on the top edge of the device:



The GeForce GTX Titan is 267 mm long, which is a perfectly normal size for a modern graphics card.

It is no different from the GTX 680 in terms of its video interfaces: a dual-link DVI-I, a dual-link DVI-D, one HDMI version 1.4a, and one DisplayPort version 1.2.

 

At the opposite end we can see the exposed side of the heatsink and a couple of screws that secure the cooler’s casing.

The GeForce GTX Titan has two MIO connectors for building multi-GPU configurations out of two, three or even four such cards.

  

There are 8- and 6-pin power connectors on the PCB, so the card seems to be in between the GTX 690 (2x8-pin) and the GTX 680 (2x6-pin) in its power requirements. According to its specs, the Titan is supposed to consume no more than 250 watts. A 600-watt or better PSU is recommended for a computer with one such device.

The Titan’s PCB features an original design with memory chips located on both sides of it:



Contrary to our expectations and to the 384-bit memory bus, the GPU is powered via six phases based on Dr.MOS components, just like on the reference GeForce GTX 680.



These are managed by an ON Semiconductor NCP4206 controller:



There are also two power phases for the graphics memory and one phase for PLL.

The GK110 GPU is as large as 520 sq. mm and carries no heat-spreader, so we can easily read its revision, which is A1, and the date of manufacture (50th week of 2012):



We’ve talked about its configuration and specs in the previous section of our review. Its 3D clock rate is 837 MHz at a voltage of 1.162 volts and can be boosted to 867 MHz at high loads (things are somewhat different in reality, though, as we will explain shortly). The clock rate and voltage are dropped to 324 MHz and 0.875 volts in 2D applications.

The graphics card is equipped with FCBGA-packaged GDDR5 chips for a total of 6 gigabytes of onboard memory. They are manufactured by Samsung Semiconductor and marked as K4G20325FD-FC03:



Their 3D clock rate is 6008 MHz. Coupled with the 384-bit bus, the peak memory bandwidth is as high as 288.4 GB/s. This is 50% higher compared to the GeForce GTX 680 and should make the new card fast at high resolutions with any type of full-screen antialiasing enabled.

The latest version of GPU-Z doesn’t report all of the GeForce GTX Titan parameters correctly: